.TH ORDCHR 3am "Jan 15 2013" "Free Software Foundation" "GNU Awk Extension Modules"
.SH NAME
ordchr \- convert characters to strings and vice versa
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ft CW
@load "ordchr"
.sp
number = ord("A")
.br
string = chr(65)
.ft R
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I ordchr
extension adds two functions named
.BR ord() .
and
.BR chr() ,
as follows.
.TP
.B ord()
This function takes a string argument, and returns the
numeric value of the first character in the string.
.TP
.B chr()
This function takes a numeric argument and returns a string
whose first character is that represented by the number.
.PP
These functions are inspired by the Pascal language functions
of the same name.
... .SH NOTES
... .SH BUGS
.SH EXAMPLE
.ft CW
.nf
@load "ordchr"
\&...
printf("The numeric value of 'A' is %d\en", ord("A"))
printf("The string value of 65 is %s\en", chr(65))
.fi
.ft R
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR "GAWK: Effective AWK Programming" ,
.IR filefuncs (3am),
.IR fnmatch (3am),
.IR fork (3am),
.IR inplace (3am),
.IR readdir (3am),
.IR readfile (3am),
.IR revoutput (3am),
.IR rwarray (3am),
.IR time (3am).
.SH AUTHOR
Arnold Robbins,
.BR arnold@skeeve.com .
.SH COPYING PERMISSIONS
Copyright \(co 2012, 2013,
Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual page provided the copyright notice and this permission
notice are preserved on all copies.
.ig
Permission is granted to process this file through troff and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual page).
..
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual page under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual page into another language, under the above conditions for
modified versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in
a translation approved by the Foundation.
